feat: [CDS-93054]: Add examples of unresolved variables in conditional execution (#5714)
harness/developer-hub: docs/continuous-delivery/x-platform-cd-features/executions/step-and-stage-conditional-execution-settings.md

                  spec:
                    skipDryRun: false
                    pruningEnabled: false
            rollbackSteps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollback Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rollbackRolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingRollback
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    pruningEnabled: false
        tags: {}
        failureStrategies:
          - onFailure:
              errors:
                - AllErrors
              action:
                type: StageRollback
        when:
          pipelineStatus: Success
          condition: <+env.name> == "harnessdevenv"
```
Here, the above pipeline's stage will execute only if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``.
When you click ``Run`` you will be prompted to provide a value for your environment during runtime. In this case, suppose you select the value as ``harnessdevenv``.
![](./static/unresolved_runtime_input.png)

Now if you click on ``Run Pipeline`` and check the execution the stage ``deploy_stage`` will be skipped as the conditional execution resolved to ``null``.

![](./static/unresolved_execution_1.png)

> Let's try to understand why this happened even though we provided the environment name as ``harnessdevenv``:

Reviewer: I really like this explanation, we should start with a step by step list of what happens when the deploy stage runs. First stage conditional check, then filling in the variables in stage definition, then, when stage starts, we do conditional checks for each step as they start...

Then, based on this, we take the example, and say: if we make the conditional at stage level reliant on stage level input, it won't work because the conditional is evaluated before values are filled. If we'd used a pipeline level expression it would have worked. And similarly for the step level check.

You can use any status value in a JEXL condition. For example, `<+pipeline.stages.cond.spec.execution.steps.echo.status> == "FAILED"`.

## Resolved and Unresolved Expressions during Conditional Execution

> This topic explains why some expressions in Conditional Execution goes unresolved during execution. Let's try to understand this scenario with an example:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This topic explains why some expressions in Conditional Execution goes unresolved during execution. 

Let's try to understand this scenario with an example:
```

Reviewer 2: Don't use :-, a colon is enough (:)

> Consider this pipeline yaml:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider this pipeline YAML:
```

            deployToAll: false
            environmentInputs: <+input>
            serviceOverrideInputs: <+input>
            infrastructureDefinitions: <+input>
          execution:
            steps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingDeploy
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    skipDryRun: false
                    pruningEnabled: false
            rollbackSteps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollback Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rollbackRolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingRollback
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    pruningEnabled: false
        tags: {}
        failureStrategies:
          - onFailure:
              errors:
                - AllErrors
              action:
                type: StageRollback
        when:
          pipelineStatus: Success
          condition: <+env.name> == "harnessdevenv"
```
Here, the above pipeline's stage will execute only if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``.

> When you click ``Run`` you will be prompted to provide a value for your environment during runtime. In this case, suppose you select the value as ``harnessdevenv``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

When you select ``Run``, you will be prompted to provide a value for your environment during runtime. In this case, suppose you select the value as ``harnessdevenv``.
```

![](./static/unresolved_runtime_input.png)

> Now if you click on ``Run Pipeline`` and check the execution the stage ``deploy_stage`` will be skipped as the conditional execution resolved to ``null``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, if you select ``Run Pipeline``, the execution the stage ``deploy_stage`` will be skipped as conditional execution resolves to ``null``.
```

                            tag: <+input>
          environment:
            environmentRef: <+input>
            deployToAll: false
            environmentInputs: <+input>
            serviceOverrideInputs: <+input>
            infrastructureDefinitions: <+input>
          execution:
            steps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingDeploy
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    skipDryRun: false
                    pruningEnabled: false
            rollbackSteps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollback Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rollbackRolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingRollback
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    pruningEnabled: false
        tags: {}
        failureStrategies:
          - onFailure:
              errors:
                - AllErrors
              action:
                type: StageRollback
        when:
          pipelineStatus: Success
          condition: <+env.name> == "harnessdevenv"
```

> Here, the above pipeline's stage will execute only if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above pipeline's stage will execute only if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``.
```

When you select ``Run``, you will be prompted to provide a value for your environment during runtime. In this case, suppose you select the value as ``harnessdevenv``:

![unresolved pipeline input](./static/unresolved_runtime_input.png)

When running the pipeline, the execution the stage ``deploy_stage`` will be skipped as conditional execution resolves to ``null``.

![unresolved execution](./static/unresolved_execution_1.png)

When you run a deploy stage, this is the pipeline execution flow:

> 1. Harness checks the ``stage`` conditional execution and then starts filling the variable defined in stage definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Harness checks the ``stage`` conditional execution and then starts filling the variable defined in the stage definition.
```

2. Checks the ``Service`` step and then fetches the ``Environment and Infrastructure`` information.

![unresolved expresssion execution](./static/unresolved_expression_execution_2.png)

3. When the stage starts, Harness checks the ``step`` conditional execution and proceed to resolve the variable step.

> In this case, when the pipeline ran, Harness first checked the stage ``deploy_stage`` conditional execution. Harness checked for the environment name, ``harnessdevenv`` here, but it resolved to null because at that time the stage had not proceeded with fetching environment information. Hence, resolved as ``null`` at that time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, when the pipeline ran, Harness first checked the stage ``deploy_stage`` conditional execution. Harness checked for the environment name, ``harnessdevenv`` here, but it resolved to null because at that time the stage had not proceeded with fetching environment information. 
```

* **Resolved variable example:**

> Now, let's discuss an example an example where above scenario will work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let's discuss an example where above scenario will work.
```

              - step:
                  name: Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingDeploy
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    skipDryRun: false
                    pruningEnabled: false
            rollbackSteps:
              - step:
                  name: Rollback Rollout Deployment
                  identifier: rollbackRolloutDeployment
                  type: K8sRollingRollback
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    pruningEnabled: false
        tags: {}
        failureStrategies:
          - onFailure:
              errors:
                - AllErrors
              action:
                type: StageRollback
        when:
          pipelineStatus: Success
```

Here, the above pipeline's step ``ShellScript_1``  will execute only if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``.

When you select ``Run``, you will be prompted to provide a value for your environment during runtime. In this case, suppose you select the value as ``harnessdevenv``:

![](./static/unresolved_runtime_input.png)

> In this case, the the step conditional execution will not skip and the variable resloves to true. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The the step conditional execution will not skip and the variable resolves to true. 
```

![](./static/unresolved_expressio_true_1.png)

> In this case, the deploy stage first started the ``Service`` step and then fetched the ``Environment and Infrastructure`` information. Afterwards, it proceeded with the execution of step ``ShellScript_1 ``. Therefore, before the executing this step, the pipeline had information about the environment, and it checked if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``. In this case, it was true, so the step got executed. If it was false, the step would get skipped but the variable would still get resolved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, the deploy stage first started the ``Service`` step and then fetched the ``Environment and Infrastructure`` information. Afterwards, it proceeded with the execution of step ``ShellScript_1 ``. Therefore, before executing this step, the pipeline had information about the environment, and it checked if the environment name is ``harnessdevenv``. In this case, it was true, so the step got executed. If it was false, the step would get skipped but the variable would still get resolved.
```
